>>One of the psychiatrists
on the program
sitting here with me,
I know that you'll
appreciate the great power,
or whole body experience,
such as a re-stimulating
experience
that I had this evening when
I had dinner at the V & T
Pizzeria across the street--
the place where I ate hundreds
of meals when I was a
graduate student at Columbia
University which is also
just across the street.
I wanted to know what I should
talk about this evening.
And Robin said, well, just
talk about your spiritual path.
So that's a path
that started in 1954.
I was a graduate
student in physics
with some of the toughest task
masters around-- TD Lee and CS
Wu and a bunch of other very
difficult and inscrutable
people that I worked
for for many years.
And somehow over the
ensuing 45 years,
I'm here today to describe
my path from atomic physicist
to the mashed potato
you see today.
Now I had a chance to
do many different things
during that career.
I spent half of my time
working on the development
of the laser, which came out
of my atomic spectroscopy
at Columbia and half of my time
doing ESP research at Stanford
Research Institute, where we had
the interesting task of trying
to increase the reliability and
accuracy of psychic functioning
and learning to put
government scientists and army
intelligence officers
in touch with apart
of themselves that's psychic.
What I learned in my last
job, I was putting lasers
on airplanes at Lockheed.
I was in aerospace.
And all of this I
discovered, my whole career
has been in remote sensing,
sometimes with ESP, sometimes
with lasers, but
always trying to see
what nobody had seen before.
And in listening to
the discussion tonight,
it reminds me of
one of the things
that I noticed in aerospace.
If you're about to put a
sensor on a satellite that's
getting launched and
everybody at the table agrees,
it means you've probably
overlooked something.
So I'm going to have to be the
person who doesn't entirely
agree with what we see today.
In a book that I wrote recently,
called "Miracles of Mind,"
I was talking about
what we know about
parapsychology, ESP research,
what we know about physics.
And I had a wonderful
quote from Stephen Hawking
that he wrote in
1985, in which he
said, "by the end
of this decade,
we will understand
everything there is
to know about modern physics."
Now I had the advantage
of writing this
10 years later in 1995.
And I sort of
unceremoniously said
that Stephen better turn the
crank pretty fast because, I
mean, enormous number of things
on the horizon that were not
understood and very
unlikely to be understood
in the next 5, 10, 20 years.
And indeed, they have not been.
With regard to understanding the
nature of the world we live in,
great progress has
obviously been made.
We can explain with great detail
how the billiard balls move
on the surface of the table.
And even with the uncertainty
in quantum physics,
we can calculate, to at
least eight decimal figures,
the wavelength of
an atomic transition
by subtracting the energy
levels in the published tables.
So atomic physics
works extremely well.
Maxwell's equations
work excellently.
But there are things that
come unraveled at the edge
of the field, little
threads that you
tug and notice that things
keep coming unraveled.
One of those in physics
is called "superposition"
that was alluded to earlier.
Superposition is
this nasty business
where you have the
cat in the box that's
neither alive nor dead.
It also pertains to the
even nastier problem
for people in
optics, who observe
that when you send photons
through a pair of slits,
even though there's only
one photon in the apparatus
at a time, you still
observe interference.
And it's not limited to photons.
It's limited to really big
things, like buckyballs.
A buckyball is 60 carbon
atoms arranged the size
of a soccer ball or in the
configuration of a soccer ball.
John Clauser, who
was the first person
to demonstrate
nonlocality, said recently,
"it looks like you can't keep
anything in a box anymore."
That is, things that appear to
be separated from one another,
even in physical reality
appear to interact.
Henry Stapp, who is a
distinguished physicist
at the University of
California in Berkeley said,
"possibly the most important
discovery in all of science,
in the history of science, is
the discovery of nonlocality."
Nonlocality was this awful
thing that Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen postulated
in 1935, saying
that, "even photons traveling
away from each other
at the speed of light are still
in contact with one another.
So that if you polarize
one, you notice
a change in the
polarization of the other."
Einstein correctly
predicted that this
is what was predicted
by quantum mechanics.
He said, therefore, since it
violated special relativity,
quantum mechanics
couldn't be right.
However, there have
now been a multitude
of experiments showing that
these twin photons do indeed
remain connected.
And in fact, this
has now been shown
over many, many kilometers.
So the idea of this
nonlocal connection
is not a metaphysical
proposition.
Of course, Buddha
in his writings,
said in many different ways
that separation is an illusion.
That is to say, that
there is only one of us
here in consciousness.
And that's why
we're compassionate.
We're compassionate because
there is in fact only one of us
here.
But when Clauser and
Freedman, or Aspect, or Gisin,
or the distinguished
physicists around the world
are looking at the nonlocal
connection between particles,
they're not thinking about ESP,
metaphysics, or consciousness.
They're thinking about this
very interesting connection
that they observe in
the physical universe.
So it's one of the
interesting things
that's predicted by
quantum theory, observed
in the laboratory.
And that's the good news.
We don't yet have a description
of the space/time in which we
live that describes the
nature of the metric
that would give us nonlocality.
In my other career path, we
do have some interesting data
that bears on this that is only
beginning to become described
sensibly by modern physics.
And that is the data for
extrasensory perception.
We know a few things without
a shadow of the doubt.
We know that it's possible
to sit in the laboratory,
close your eyes,
and quiet your mind,
and describe with
surprising accuracy what's
going on in distant
parts of the world.
We know that a person can
hold a thought in his mind
and that thought can
be accurately described
by another person,
even though there
is no physical, material object
corresponding to that thought.
Even more astonishing is
that we know-- probably
the most interesting
thing I could tell you,
if you don't hear
anything that I say,
if you don't come tomorrow-- the
most interesting thing I could
tell you is that it is no
more difficult to describe
and experience something
that's going to happen
in your future-- in your
near future-- that's no more
difficult than to describe
a picture that's face down
on the table and
hidden from view.
That is, our ability
to know the future
can be made as accurate
and reliable as our ability
to describe the hidden present.
What that says is not that
there's some magic afoot
but rather that we
profoundly misunderstand
the nature of the
causality that,
in fact, underlies
the organizing
principles of the universe.
There's something fundamentally
with our knowledge
of causality.
And modern physics has yet
to say the very first word
about how it is that we
can sit in the laboratory,
as we did for 20
years, and describe
what's going on in China,
Soviet Union, Iran hostages.
That experiment worked.
That is, we published in the
proceedings of the Engineering
Society, Nature Magazine,
Academy of Sciences,
and so forth.
That is, the ESP side of
this is not metaphysics.
We had very tough contract
monitors and NASA, CIA,
the army-- none of whom
suffer fools gladly.
And if any of you
have ever tried
to get government
research money,
you'll appreciate that the
most paranormal part of this
is that we had continued support
for ESP research for 23 years.
[LAUGHTER]
So we must have been
doing something right.
Now what I discovered, it's as
though I had a spiritual path.
That is, what I'm telling you
is that somehow I started out
as a research physicist
and had the opportunity,
through my career, to
metamorphise from a research
physicist to a psychic
spy for the CIA.
And through that path,
I had an opportunity
to discover that there are
many expansive experiences
available to us.
The principle of those
is that the observation
that there is more
going on than simply
residing in the physical body.
That is, we are capable
of expanded awareness
that allows us to
inflow information
from distant locations
that is quite verifiable.
And often surprisingly accurate.
We can inflow that
information and the distance
doesn't matter.
We can also outflow
our healing intention.
We can sit in a laboratory
if we're trained as a healer
and affect the physiology
and the physical outcome
of people who are very sick.
And that research has been
done in several laboratories,
including California
Pacific Medical
Center, where a
recent experiment was
done with 60 AIDS patients.
30 of them received
healing prayers.
The other 30 were controls
in a double blind study.
So everybody wished that they
were prayed for, of course,
but only 30 actually were.
And those 30 had
significantly improved
outcomes-- fewer opportunistic
illnesses, fewer trips
to the hospital, and so forth.
And there are now four large
clinical studies published
in mainline medical magazines.
And in a certain sense, in
the same way that experiments
in nonlocality are the hot
issue in modern physics,
experiments in distant
healing are the hot issue
in modern medicine, strongly
supported these days by NIH.
Now, as a physicist,
I would have
to say that physics does not
have a lot to say, presently,
about either inflowing
information from the distance
or from the future
or outflowing healing
intention across the
country and affecting,
beneficially, the physical
state of people in the hospital.
And what I observed in my
10 years sitting in the dark
with my eyes shut is that
between this interesting
condition of inflowing
information and outflowing
healing intention, by the
continuity that any physicist
would know, between the
inflow and the outflow,
there must be a quiet place.
In that quiet place
we have an opportunity
to experience the expanded
awareness that precipitates us
into an opportunity to reside
in love, to experience God,
to have the kind of
oceanic experiences
the mystics talk about.
And none of this, of course,
requires belief in anything.
None of this is dogma.
It's the path that all mystics
have had which says, basically,
if you will sit
down and be quiet,
you will have the
following experience.
It's like a lab report
that we do at Columbia
says that if you will stop
your mental chatter, if you'll
give up your judgment and
your fear and just be quiet,
we think that
you're going to have
some interesting experiences.
Why don't you go home,
do that for six weeks,
write it up, and let
us know what you found?
So it's a very
scientific approach.
There's no conflict
between spirituality
and a scientific frame of life.
And this experience
of expanded awareness,
this opportunity to
reside in a loving state,
is the reward for learning
to quit the ongoing chatter
and especially difficult for
a New Yorker like myself,
to give up some of my favorite
things like fear and judgment.
But in the end, it turns
out to be worthwhile.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
>>All of us agree that
consciousness exists.
And my question is, is
consciousness a product
of the physiological
processes of the brain
or a fundamental
aspect of existence?
>>A slightly easier
way of phrasing it,
instead of talking
about consciousness,
which is somewhat
of a loose concept,
we might talk about awareness.
>>Well, awareness is good,
but Dr. Coker tonight,
was saying in physics that
he accepts consciousness,
that consciousness is part of
what's going on in physics.
Now are we talking about
the same thing here?
Are we talking about the
consciousness of the brain?
Or are we talking about it
as a fundamental situation
that exists?
>>Several years ago, I saw
in a bookstore the book
by Francis Crick.
It said "The
Astonishing Hypothesis."
Nobel Prize winning scientist
explains consciousness.
So I said, this is a
book I have to read.
So I bought the
book, open it up.
And at the beginning,
he says, well,
let's simplify it a little
to the problem of perception.
And then he gives
pages and pages
of experiments showing that
when we observe something,
there are changes happening in
the retina-- electric changes,
biochemical changes.
Then have many, many experiments
showing that things are
happening in the optical track.
Again, more electric currents,
more biochemical changes.
And then finally changes in
the suboccipital cortex- again,
electric potentials and
more biochemical changes.
And then he left it there,
where, obviously, that's
where the problem begins.
I mean, what is it that
is capable to create out
of these suboccipital
changes, electric potentials,
and biochemical changes, a
Technicolor sort of conscious
in our experience of
the object out there
that we are perceiving.
So I suddenly had
the feeling that I
was like in the Sufi story.
When there's a lamp
and under the lamp,
there's a guy sort of
looking for something.
Another guy comes and
says, what are you doing?
Says, well, I lost a key.
Says, can I help you?
So they both end up on their
knees looking for the key.
And then the newcomer says,
well, I can't see anything.
Are you sure you lost it here?
He says, no over there.
Says, over there?
Why are we looking here?
Says, we wouldn't have
a chance here, you know,
because there's light here.
Over there, there's dark.
[LAUGHTER]
So in this book, he covered
a lot of experiments
of things that can be studied.
And then he left,
absolutely unanswered,
the question that really
cannot be answered.
I've never seen anybody in
any kind of scientific books
or articles even beginning
to tackle that question-- how
that gap between matter and
consciousness could be bridged.
How something that's inert,
that's reactive, that's dead
could create a sense
of self awareness,
a sense of consciousness.
So I myself came into the
work with nonordinary states
with a very firm conviction
that was kind of instilled
in me by my medical training.
That it's absolutely obvious
that somehow consciousness
emerges out of the complexity
of the neurophysiological
processes, until I became aware
of a category of experiences
that we call transpersonal
now-- experiences in which
in these nonordinary
states, we can
experience the dissolution
of our boundaries
and experience ourselves
as another person,
or experience a
group consciousness,
or experience extremely
authentic identification
with other life
forms from primates
all the way down to protozoan,
unicellular organisms.
Experiences in which we can
and go into archetypal domains.
We can experience and
encounter archetypal figures
from different cultures, from
mythologies that we have never
studied-- the Jungian idea of
the collective unconscious.
Now I'll just mention
one experience
that everybody will know
that obviously showing
that consciousness can do
things that the brain couldn't
possibly do.
At least, not the kind
of brain that we describe
in our university studies.
And that's the famous experience
that thanatologists see.
It's now absolutely obvious.
It has been confirmed many times
that it's possible for a person
to have an experience
of clinical death.
And as that person is
being resuscitated,
the subjective experience
is that consciousness
detaches from the
body and is freely
moving in the environment
and maintaining
the perception of the
environment without senses.
The person is lying in a
coma with the eyes closed.
And this embodied consciousness
can perceive the environment--
>>Flat EEG--
>>Flat EEG sometimes.
This can be observing, for
example, the whole situation
from the ceiling.
And then decides to check on
the situation and floats down
and checks the gauges on
the defibrillation machine.
And then decides to
go for a little walk.
Goes through the walls.
Check what's happening in
other parts of the building.
And then maybe
experience something
that's happening 200
or 2,000 miles away.
And then when the person
comes back to consciousness--
if there is a person who is
interested in this phenomenon
and gets the
accounts and checks,
the person finds out that
these things are really
happening-- all these locations
the disembodied consciousness
had the capacity
to see, to perceive
without the sensory organs.
There's now a book
by Ken Ring, probably
the most famous
thanatologist, which
is called "Mindsight" where
he describes his recent study
where people who are
congenitally blind
were able to see at
the time when they had
a near-death experience,
and their consciousness
was out of their
body, and then lost
the capacity to
see again when they
reconnected with their body.
And he is particularly
interested in studying
experiences that he calls
vertical out-of-body
experiences, where these
people not only see something,
but what they see is there
for other people in consensus
reality.
So to me, this is a paradigm
challenge if I ever saw one.
I don't know how
anybody could explain
it was the kind of
conceptual framework
that we are teaching
in our universities.
>>Thank you.
>>The question you're
asking is the very topic
that was in at least the French
editions of TIME magazine
last week, whether
or not consciousness
is an artifact of
physiology or whether or not
it's something that is around
us and has always existed.
So we're tossing out new ideas.
There's a growing
body of research
to suggest that consciousness,
for lack-- and the terms
and the semantics come into play
here because we haven't defined
any of these words-- but
suggest that consciousness
is the field of information,
the living body of information,
that surrounds
physical dimensions.
And there's a growing
body of evidence
to suggest-- let
me just ask you,
how many of you
in your textbooks
were taught that we remember
and hold memories in our brains?
How many of you?
Isn't that pretty much
what we've all been taught?
It was certainly
what I was taught.
There's a growing
body of research
that suggests that we may not
actually remember in our brains
the way we think we do--
that the neural circuits
in our brains actually
function as a very
specific form of
antenna that tune
to the fields of information
that surround and are held
in place, by some estimates,
in the magnetic fields
of our Earth, much the
way computer circuits
are held in place in magnetic
fields of memory and chips.
And if that turns
out to be true,
the implications to this
question, then, are vast.
It means that we simply
have the ability to tune
to the information in
creation and the ability
to change the way that we
tune into that information.
I had the opportunity a
few years ago-- Michio,
maybe you've seen
the thin sections
they made of Dr. Einstein's
brain after he died.
The University of
Kansas freeze dried
in thin section of
Albert Einstein's brain
because they wanted
to see what was
so different about his
brain that allowed him to do
the things he did in his life.
And they found it looked
like everyone else's brain.
With the exception of maybe a
few more folds in the frontal
lobes, they said it really
looked pretty much like
everyone else's.
And that is what we would expect
if, in fact, we're not holding
the information in our brains.
So as a little adjunct
to this, if this is true,
if our brains are simply
tuning the information
in a nonphysical field
around our brain, then
perhaps we can simulate
that in computer chips.
And there's research
being done right now,
with computer chips based
in water droplets instead
of silicon, that hold memory
in fields surrounding the water
droplet rather than
inside the chip itself.
And depending on where
this research and this kind
of information
goes, I think it may
be one of the great
physiological discoveries
in consciousness of our time.
So.
>>Thank you.
>>Well, I would like to really
connect this conversation
a little with the one
that we started with.
And I want to take off from
this issue of awareness.
For me, as interesting as it is,
whether as so many people are
positing now, the psi field,
all of these possible areas
that we're exploring-- which
I think is fascinating.
And I think it's very important
that we're exploring these
because what you're really
doing in all of this
is what I talked about this
afternoon, re-imagining
and reconfiguring reality.
But for me, the basic question
isn't so much to find out.
Because my answer
would be it's both.
You know, that there
probably is a field outside.
And that certainly it
resides in our brains.
So for me, the issue
is very simply,
what are the implications
of the lack of awareness
that we find today
among so many people,
at a time when the world
is at such a crisis point?
And so many people,
particularly policymakers,
but people all around us, are in
total denial about the dangers.
You know, technology's
going to fix it.
Or, there's no
population crisis.
I mean, hello.
You know?
We're in the last year
before the last year
when the pond is full with
exponential population growth.
And my interest
is, what conditions
lead people to so constrict
their awareness so that they
are in denial about
life threatening
matters-- life
threatening to them
and their children and
their grandchildren,
not just to mine and yours.
And, of course,
then I really would
like to bring it
back to something
that I spoke about
at some length
today, but want to just
briefly touch base on with you.
In what I've called
a dominator model--
it is very constricted
awareness that
is the product of,
first of all, the child
rearing of that kind of model.
What begins to
happen to people is
that they must go into
denial about the pain that
is being caused to them
by those on whom they
depend for survival.
So they become
habituated to not even
be in touch with what
their own senses tell them,
even beyond this.
Because of rote obedience
is part of that model.
The child, which is born
to freely move and to enjoy
and to freely learn, becomes
more robotic, more conditioned
to respond to
external authority.
And I would like to
have us consider here
that this is a serious
matter, whether it's
from outsiders or from
inside of the brain.
We know, I mean there are
some very specific things
we can do to break these cycles
of people who are habitually
in denial-- because
that is how they
have learned to cope with very
unpleasant dominator realities.
We know that the
neuropsychology of the brain,
the chemical pathways
of the brain,
are affected by the quality of
child rearing on this planet,
here, in this reality.
We know that children
who are abused
and who are violently
treated, and it can also
be severe psychological
abuse, lose their capacity
for learning.
Now what are we really
talking about, awareness?
It's a capacity
to be fully aware
and to really learn from the
feedback from your environment.
That's a huge part
of it, isn't it?
They also lose their
capacity to relate.
And they lose their capacity,
to a very large extent--
all of these are awareness
issues-- to be aware
of their own pain or of the pain
that they're causing others.
And I would like to suggest
to you that if we really
want to have that
expanded consciousness
and fulfill-- I mean, the
work that you are all doing
is-- and my husband, I have
to say, Dr. David Lloyd,
was one of the people who,
in the basement of the UCLA
School of Medicine, was having
some of the first experiments
in mental telepathy.
He's a psychologist.
I mean, yes, it exists.
But to unleash and to
free these capacities,
I think we also have
to create, again,
the kind of child rearing,
the kind of human institutions
that open us up to being
able to do something
constructive with this
incredible knowledge,
this incredible capacity.
And the thing that
comes up again and again
is our interconnection
from physics, from biology.
So I really would like to really
bring it, I'm very practical,
I would like to bring it
to the level at which I
so passionately believe
we must direct our work.
How do we use all of this
to break these cycles,
to break this dominator system,
and to apply all of this
to the task ahead of freeing us?
And also, perhaps,
even saving us?
[APPLAUSE]
>>I'm sometimes
asked a question.
What does string theory
say about consciousness?
And the answer is, it
makes the problem worse.
We have problems
enough with cats,
whether they are alive or dead.
And when Einstein would
invite friends over,
he would always point
them to the moon.
And he would ask
them a question.
Does the moon exist because
a mouse looks at the moon?
Does a mouse have consciousness?
The mouse can make
a measurement.
The mouse, an observer,
looking at the moon.
Does the moon spring
into existence
when a mouse looks at it?
And, well, yeah, in some sense.
You can make a case for that.
How much consciousness do
animals have, therefore?
It goes on forever,
as you can tell.
There's a play on
Broadway, "Copenhagen."
Best play best Broadway
play of the year last year.
I saw "Copenhagen."
How many people here
have seen that play?
How many people here have
understood that play?
[LAUGHTER]
Well, the best play
of the year, not only
do they debate whether or
not Heisenberg willingly
worked on the
atomic bomb or not,
and whether he knew what
critical mass was, and, you
know, why are we speaking
English here today
and not Germany?
A small part of that reason why
I'm not speaking to you today
in German, and there's
no swastika behind me,
is because Heisenberg goofed.
He made a mistake
on critical mass.
>>The question is, did
he make it intentionally?
>>That's right.
That's what the play
"Copenhagen" does not fully
answer.
Did Heisenberg goof
intentionally or not?
OK.
The other question
they debate is
the question of consciousness,
dead cats, lives cats.
They get into this question.
Does the moon exist when
a mouse looks at it?
Well, with string
theory, it gets
worse because the smallest unit
of string theory is a universe.
We're talking about a
theory of universes now.
Each solution of string
theory is an entire universe.
We're not talking about
cats and dogs anymore.
We're talking about existence
itself, physical reality,
everything there is.
And if you write wave
functions of strings,
which is what I do for a
living-- the psi of strings--
in fact, I'm the co-founder
of string field theory,
which is precisely that.
I was able to write the
equations by which you
write the fields of strings.
These strings
describe universes.
Each solution is a universe.
And therefore, you have a
wave function of a universe.
And the question is, who
looks at the universe?
What observer can look
at an entire universe,
an entire bubble
expanding in hyperspace?
Can a mouse look at
an entire universe?
Who decides which
universe is our universe
if there's no when there to look
at that particular universe?
I mean, you get headaches
thinking about this, OK?
So starting with the
question of consciousness,
whether or not the wave
functions really exist
or not in a state if
you don't look at,
you get to the point
of whether or not
universes can exist if
there's no one there
to observe a universe?
Because where are you sitting?
If you are looking
at a wave function,
where are you sitting if you
are outside physical reality?
I mean, you get headaches
thinking about this thing.
So in a short word, we
physicists don't got a clue.
We're clueless as
to the final answer.
Hawking, of course, has been
famous in the last few years
writing about wave
functions of universes.
He has psi of universe.
He introduced something
called superspace, the space
of all possible universes.
That's the space in which
his psi function lives.
Not the wave function of x, y,
and z of ordinary three space,
the space of universe
called superspace.
That's the space that
Hawking lives in.
OK?
We don't know the
answer to that.
However, let me bring
it down to earth.
What I'm concerned
about, as a human,
is whether or not we will
attain planetary consciousness.
You see, we are on the verge
of attaining type one status.
Like I said before,
many people put us
100, 200 years
away from type one.
But our brain is genetically
identical to the brains
of people coming out of
Africa 100,000 years ago.
You take people coming out
of Africa 100,000 years ago,
you give them a shave,
three piece suit,
and put them on a
Wall Street, and they
look like all the other
barbarians on Wall Street.
Genetically the same, OK,
doing the same kind of antics
that we see the
people on Wall Street.
Let's do a science experiment.
Let's all take a subway
train to Wall Street
and you'll see what I mean.
Well, now we have
nuclear weapons.
But the same primitive
tribal instincts
that govern us throughout
most of existence,
99.9% of our human exist--
we lived in small tribes.
Small tribes of
maybe 100 people,
led by some charismatic leader.
100 people.
That was our universe.
And what defined us
was the fact that we
were members of a tribe in
opposition to other tribes.
Well, that got us into war.
And that got us into
a lot of mischief.
Now we have nuclear weapons.
Now we have global warming.
And now we're truly, on a
cosmic scale, messing up
the planet Earth.
And the question
is, can we extend
our definition of a tribe
to the entire planet?
If we make the technical
transition to type one,
are we going to make a
conscious decision to think,
as a planetary civilization
with limited resources,
with finite ability
to pollute the planet,
it's not clear at all.
OK.
One day, during the '80s,
Ronald Reagan met Gorbachev.
And they had a
fascinating discussion.
One thing you have to
hand it to Ronald Reagan,
he was able to reduce everything
in terms of Hollywood.
That was his world view.
Hollywood.
And Gorbachev asked
Reagan a question.
Under what circumstances
can we work together?
I'm a communist, he said.
You're a capitalist.
And Reagan scratched
his head a bit.
And Reagan said, you
know, the only way
he could possibly envision
us working together
is if we were invaded
by the Martians.
And then Gorbachev
scratched his head and said,
well, you may have
a point there.
You see, if there's another
tribe out there that's hostile,
the Martians, then us human
tribes have to get together.
And perhaps we can
put aside the Cold War
and all the animosities
of the '50s and the '40s.
Well, the question
that we ask ourselves
today is, if we are
our own worst enemies,
if our technology, the crowning
achievements of the human mind,
is what could also
doom us, then will
we have planetary consciousness?
Will we begin to think of
the human race as a tribe?
That's not clear to me.
OK.
And if you don't believe
me, go to the Balkans.
Go to places on the Earth
where ethnic cleansing
is the name of the game.
And if we think, we're
above ethnic cleansing,
what did we do with
the Native Americans?
The Native Americans
were put on reservations.
That's commonly called
ethnic cleansing.
OK?
So the question is, can we
enlarge our sense of tribe?
I don't know, OK.
It was mentioned here the
experiences of World War II.
During World War
II, my parents were
put in a concentration
camp in California.
OK?
We were not members of the tribe
of Californians back in 1942,
after Pearl Harbor.
OK.
So the question is, are we
going to attain type one status
at a conscious
level, even though we
may have the instruments of
a planetary civilization,
a planetary internet,
a planetary television
system, a planetary
way of exchanging
personal experiences?
It's not clear to me.
However, I will, with
every fiber of my body,
try to build a
world where we will
have that planetary
consciousness, where
the smallest unit of our
existence is the entire earth.
I will work with every fiber
of my body to see that happen.
Because I saw what happened
to my parents' generation.
And I don't want that to happen
in my children's generation.
[APPLAUSE]
>>I totally agree with you
that that native empathy
and that sense of connection
that we're all built with
needs to come to the fore.
But I have to disagree
with you about the view
that you present about
tribal societies.
If you just look at some tribal
societies in recent history,
without going into
prehistory even--
>>I'm talking about
pre-prehistory.
>>Well, I'm talking about
pre-prehistory, too.
But if you look at tribes today,
there were tribes, for example,
when Columbus came
to the Americas.
And some were horribly
dominator-oriented,
like the Aztecs, OK?
But others were much
more partnership-oriented
and they welcomed these people.
They did not have
that tribal mentality.
OK?
But the conquistadores sure did.
I'd really like to
disengage, if we possibly
can, from this notion that we
have to achieve something that
has never been achieved,
that somehow this
is not something possible and
inherent in our prehistory.
As I've said today,
the evidence is
very compelling for a
multilinear rather than
a unilinear theory of
cultural evolution.
Very few things in our
planet are just one way, OK?
There are very often
diversity, alternatives.
And the evidence that is
beginning to come through to us
is that while not
society is violence free,
many of the assumptions
that we have
made from social
biologists, for example,
who keep telling us a mythology,
a theoretical mythology that
really justifies a dominator
model that's not so very
different from original sin.
Something's wrong with us.
We have to be controlled
kind of mythology.
It's always been that way.
So, yeah, maybe, you
can dream about it,
but it will never happen.
There is compelling evidence
of earlier societies,
both on the tribal level,
in the early Neolithic,
possibly in the paleolithic--
although it's probably true,
because we don't
see in their art
the representations
of armed battles.
And we even find
into the Bronze Age,
where the Minoan
civilization-- archaeologists
have gone crazy trying
to somehow prove
that there was something
really wrong with the Minoans
because they didn't have
fortifications or signs of war.
It didn't fit into
their paradigm.
And all I'm trying
to say, Michio,
is there's a lot of evidence,
very interesting evidence
out there that,
both biologically
and in terms of
cultural evolution,
simply contradicts this view
that the tribalism is something
that we've had and
all of these groups
were always against each other.
So I would like
to really suggest
to that the issue is
the social structure.
OK?
And we replicate
this tribalism, not
under-- we can't change
it on the global level
is the other thing
I want to say.
If we're going to
change this, it's
going to be in our
intimate relations first.
If we're going to
change this, we're
going to change the
use of violence,
to impose one's will, to
control another being,
on the intimate level,
in parent-child relations
and in gender relations.
And if we really want
to have the basis
for a peaceful society-- you
mention Bosnia-- the Yugoslav
peninsula-- and there've been
interesting analysis done
of this-- it is a total
dominator family structure
in so many of these places.
And they're just playing
out the same drama.
Well, anyway, I'm going to stop.
[LAUGHTER]
[APPLAUSE]
>>I wanted to go back for a
moment to the question that
was raised earlier about
science and spirituality.
I, as a Jew who didn't
just escape the Nazis
but was aware of it
deeply as a child,
I grew up in the most
intensely secular kind
of German Jewish family
that you could imagine.
My father was an
English professor
and the Bible was read strictly
as culture and literature.
There was nothing to it.
And I'm reminded
of Huston Smith who
has-- you're going to
hear-- has critiqued
the divinity schools
around the country
because they talk about
comparative religion,
analysis of religious beliefs,
the history of religion.
The only problem is they never
indicate it's about anything.
In other words, the
thing that distinguishes
the spiritual or the
religious-- and I
have a lot of trouble talking
about God and spirituality,
given, and I think there's a
certain shame about talking
that way among
scientists or anybody
that's supposedly raised
in a clinical, scientific,
objective, whatever it is.
But it seems to me,
that's missing here.
In other words, that in
the nonordinary state work
or when you blow
your Western mind,
you are opened up to the
presence of the divine.
It's a palpable,
powerful, real experience.
And from that place, you cannot
do these things we're talking
about.
You cannot treat the earth
and rape it as simply a thing.
You are part of it.
It is you.
We can talk and
entreat ourselves
in the most progressive,
liberal, empathic way.
But if we don't
do it in relation
to some kind of experience of a
higher conscious of the divine,
of an intelligence
beyond ourselves,
whatever you want to call
it as something real,
I think it's going
to be cosmetic.
And I think that it requires
a radical transformation
of our relationship to
ourselves and ourselves
as spiritual beings in
relation to the cosmos
as a living, intelligent,
godlike, whatever
you want to call it, entity.
>>But John, don't you think
that that divine is in us, too?
>>Yes.
It's not out there.
>>It's not out there.
I mean, that's really been
part of my spiritual journey.
>>It's still where this opening
of consciousness that we're
talking about ultimately leads.
>>But I'm only
saying that for us
to open that, because there
are plenty of religious people
who are totally dominator,
bigoted, fanatic.
For us to get there,
we have to deal
with what are the things
that close us down.
>>And John mentioned
the consciousness,
so I would like to just describe
some of the experiences that
have bearing on this.
I mentioned the
transpersonal experiences,
where we can literally identify
in a very authentic way
with other people.
We can identify
with human groups.
We can experience our selves
as different life forms.
And one of the things that
you see, quite regularly
as a result of
those experiences,
is just a development of
a system of meta values
and meta motivations the
way Maslow talk about it.
You see very, very
profound changes--
if it's done responsibly.
It doesn't mean
that everybody who
gets into an unordinary state in
a rave somewhere or in a party
is going to have
that experience.
But if it happens in the proper
context, with the proper set
and setting responsibly,
you see development.
You see changes in a
specific direction.
For example, aggression.
Very, very deeply reduced after
those kinds of experiences.
A tremendous development of
tolerance, whether it's racial,
cultural, you know, political.
A tremendous concern about
the planet, very much
what Michio was talking about.
You know, feeling a sense
of planetary citizenship
rather than a commitment
to a particular culture,
a particular group.
You don't have to
teach people ecology
because you can
experience what it feels
like to be a fish somewhere
in Albania or Hamburg,
when you get all
the toxic products
from the German
industry and so on.
So there is a very
specific direction.
>>You're basically
saying it's in us,
it just needs to be freed.
>>You see, I'm talking
about spirituality not
about religion.
I think that
religions actually add
to the problems
in the world today
because a typical mainstream
religion unites people
within its own range,
but automatically sets
that group against another.
So it's sort of partially
unitive, but ultimately
divisive-- all the terms
like pagans, goyim, infidels,
and so on.
In many parts of the
world, religion is,
if not the cause, then at
least an excuse for violence.
>>You know that the leadership
in the dominator societies
hate psychedelics.
They're terribly threatened by
nonorderly states of conscious
for just the reasons that
Stan's talking about.
>>--point that I think is so
exciting about some of this is
that there are many avenues
to free us from this dominator
overlay.
Because we've all carried.
I mean, we all have acquired it.
And this, apparently, as
Terrance McKenna always
used to say, is
one of the avenues
that we have to free this in us.
>>What I see
happening here, this--
what's happening on
the panel, I think,
is a beautiful microcosm of
what we do in our world and life
with different walks of life.
This is where I think the
semantics is important.
There's a single consciousness,
this field of information.
However, the human mind,
the collective mind,
is striving to understand our
role, and understand itself,
in the presence of
that consciousness.
And I think we're all talking
about precisely the same thing.
The physics describes
the stuff out there
that the ancients
said is the mirror
of our reflected universe.
So the physics now,
the quantum hologram,
the superstring theory
is describing the stuff
that mirrors back to us
what you're now saying
and what we're talking
about in our lives.
What we become from
within, the hologram
will mirror back to us.
So the answer to the
question is if we'd like
to see change in our world?
I think we have
enough now that we
can bring what we know to bear
on the condition of our lives.
And the one theme that
plays out over and over
again through the ancient
traditions, and now
it's playing out
in modern science,
is saying what we've
become from within
is what the world is showing us.
So if we'd like to see
change in our world,
we're invited to
honor life all life.
Honor all the
possibilities of life.
Honor the principles of unity.
And it begins, not just
within the family unit,
it begins within the individual.
And what science is now
showing us again and again is
when we honor those
principles-- love, compassion,
understanding,
tolerance-- from within,
we can full well expect
that the world is going
to mirror that back to us.
And I think that is
the one principle that
may be applied to the conditions
and the suffering of our world.
I see Cody closed his book.
You know, that was only
question number one.
Of all the questions Cody
was going to ask us tonight,
and he's closed the book.
So he gave up.
But I think that's what
we're saying here--
>>I think Russell has
something to say to this.
>>You know, I wanted to strongly
support John Mack's comments
on the importance of
spiritual experience,
which I would tend to
call expended awareness
because as a physicist,
I don't exactly
know what consciousness is.
But I know what
expanded awareness is.
And I think that the feeling
of oceanic connection, the idea
that we're connected
to one another--
as I mentioned
earlier, the Buddhists
say that there's
only one of us here.
And other disciplines
have other ways
of describing that
we are all one
in various spiritual traditions.
I think that's critical.
I think no matter how much
recycling you get people to do,
how many cans you
squash, it's not
going to elevate the awareness
that limitless problems are
caused by our ego and our
sense of tribalization.
It's a little ego
that thinks that
who we are as our physical
body that is really
the cause of the trouble.
And that we all want
to save the planet,
but we want our house to look
nicer and our car to be bigger.
Hafez is a Persian poet who
was 100 years after Rumi.
Hafez sort of wrote
telegraphic little poems
summarizing the ideas of
the perennial philosophy.
One of Hafez's poems
asks, why are there so
few people sitting in the
hall of the great master?
The answer is, you have to
leave a little piece of your ego
with the hat check girl.
And she won't give it back.
Ouch.
And it's giving up that
little piece of our ego,
that feel of separateness,
really has to be overcome.
And as John said,
that is largely
overcome through any spiritual,
mind expanding discipline--
whether it's drug induced, or
prayer induced, or meditation
induced.
As Father Thomas Keating,
who's a mystical,
visionary, Catholic priest
talks about centering prayer,
surrendering your
ego, and experiencing
God in the same path that the
Buddhists talked about doing
the exact same thing.
So I think there are
many, many paths,
whether it's prayer,
meditation, drugs allow
a person to surrender
their ego and have
this experience of
oceanic connection
that makes the saving
the planet possible.
[APPLAUSE]